Document the new composite actions and reusable workflows (#279)
plone/meta: README.md

There are a few, and growing, other configuration options in a few files,
where the simple approach described above is not enough.

## GitHub Actions shared automations

To avoid [duplicating](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/sharing-automations/avoiding-duplication) workflow content across Plone projects, the [`plone/meta` repository](https://github.com/plone/meta) provides a set of reusable workflows and composite actions.

> These actions and workflows are used by codebases generated with [`Cookieplone`](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone) and [`cookieplone-templates`](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone-templates).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These actions and workflows are used by code bases generated with [`Cookieplone`](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone) and [`cookieplone-templates`](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone-templates).
```

> ## Composite Actions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Composite actions
```

Composite actions combine commonly used steps into reusable units that simplify writing GitHub workflows.

### `setup_backend_uv`

> Sets up and installs a backend codebase using [UV](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The action `setup_backend_uv` sets up and installs a backend code base using [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv).
```

> Also handles package caching using [`actions/cache`](https://github.com/actions/cache).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also handles package caching using [`actions/cache`](https://github.com/actions/cache).
```

This action assumes:

> * The codebase uses UV for dependency management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The codebase uses uv for dependency management.
```

* A `Makefile` provides an `install` target.
* The `Makefile` supports overriding `PYTHON_VERSION` and `PLONE_VERSION` via environment variables.

> ##### Inputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Inputs
```

* `python-version`: Python version to use.
* `plone-version`: Plone version to use.

> * `working-directory`: Path to the backend codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `working-directory`: Path to the backend code base.
```

> ##### Example usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example usage
```

```yaml
- name: Setup backend codebase
  uses: plone/meta/.github/actions/setup_backend_uv@2.x
  with:
    python-version: 3.12
    plone-version: 6.1.1
    working-directory: backend
```

### `setup_frontend`

> Sets up and installs a frontend codebase using [pnpm](https://pnpm.io/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The action `setup_frontend` sets up and installs a frontend code base using [pnpm](https://pnpm.io/).
```

> Also handles package caching using [`actions/cache`](https://github.com/actions/cache).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also handles package caching using [`actions/cache`](https://github.com/actions/cache).
```

This action assumes:

> * The codebase uses pnpm for dependency management and was generated with [Cookieplone](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The code base uses pnpm for dependency management and was generated with [Cookieplone](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone).
```

* A `Makefile` provides an `install` target.

> ##### Inputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Inputs
```

* `node-version`: Node.js version to use.
* `working-directory`: Path to the frontend codebase.

> ##### Example usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example usage
```

```yaml
- name: Setup frontend codebase
  uses: plone/meta/.github/actions/setup_frontend@2.x
  with:
    node-version: 22.x
    working-directory: frontend
```

### `setup_uv`

> Sets up [UV](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) and configures package caching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The action `setup_uv` sets up [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) and configures package caching.
```

This action assumes:

> * The codebase uses UV for dependency management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The code base uses uv for dependency management.
```

> ##### Inputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Inputs
```

* `python-version`: Python version to use.

> * `working-directory`: Path to the Python codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `working-directory`: Path to the Python code base.
```

> ##### Example usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example usage
```

```yaml

> - name: Setup UV

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- name: Set up uv
```

  uses: plone/meta/.github/actions/setup_uv@2.x
  with:
    python-version: 3.12
    working-directory: docs
```

> ## Reusable Workflows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Reusable workflows
```

Reusable workflows automate testing, building, documentation, and deployment tasks.
They are grouped into:

> - **Backend workflows**: Python/Plone projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Backend workflows**: Python-based projects for Plone
```

> - **Frontend workflows**: Node.js/Volto projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Frontend workflows**: Node.js-based projects for Plone
```

- **Documentation workflows**: Building and validating documentation
- **Container workflows**: Building and publishing Docker images

> Each workflow assumes the use of UV (Python) or pnpm (Node.js) for dependency management and standard Makefile targets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each workflow assumes the use of uv for Python-based projects or pnpm for Node.js-based projects for dependency management and standard Makefile targets.
```

> ### Backend Workflows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Backend workflows

The following sections describe the workflows for the Plone backend.

```

#### `backend-lint`

> Lints and performs static analysis on a backend codebase, including formatting, XML/ZCML validation, package metadata checking, Python version checking, and optional type checking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `backend-lint` lints and performs static analysis on a backend code base, including formatting, XML/ZCML validation, package metadata checking, Python version checking, and optional type checking.
```

##### Inputs

* `python-version`: Python version to use. (Required)

> * `plone-version`: Plone version to use. (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `python-version`: Python version to use. Required.
* `plone-version`: Plone version to use. Required.
```

> * `working-directory`: Path to the backend codebase. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `working-directory`: Path to the backend code base. Defaults to `.`.
```

* `check-typing`: Whether to run static typing checks using `mypy`. Defaults to `false`.
* `version-ruff`: Version of [ruff](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff) to use. Defaults to `latest`.

> * `version-zpretty`: Version of [zpretty](https://github.com/plone/zpretty) to use. Defaults to `latest`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `version-zpretty`: Version of [zpretty](https://github.com/collective/zpretty) to use. Defaults to `latest`.
```

* `version-pyroma`: Version of [pyroma](https://github.com/regebro/pyroma) to use. Defaults to `latest`.
* `version-check-python`: Version of [check-python-versions](https://pypi.org/project/check-python-versions/) to use. Defaults to `latest`.

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  lint:
    name: "Backend: Lint"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/backend-lint.yml@2.x
    with:
      python-version: 3.12
      plone-version: 6.1.1
      working-directory: backend
```

#### `backend-pytest`

> Runs backend tests using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `backend-pytest` runs backend tests using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/).
```

##### Inputs

* `python-version`: Python version to use. (Required)
* `plone-version`: Plone version to use. (Required)

> * `working-directory`: Path to the backend codebase. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `python-version`: Python version to use. Required.
* `plone-version`: Plone version to use. Required.
* `working-directory`: Path to the backend code base. Defaults to `.`.
```

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  test:
    name: "Backend: Test"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/backend-pytest.yml@2.x
    with:
      python-version: 3.12
      plone-version: 6.1.1
      working-directory: backend
```

#### `backend-pytest-coverage`

> Runs backend tests and generates a coverage report with [coverage.py](https://coverage.readthedocs.io/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `backend-pytest-coverage` runs backend tests and generates a coverage report with [coverage.py](https://coverage.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
```

##### Inputs

* `python-version`: Python version to use. (Required)
* `plone-version`: Plone version to use. (Required)

> * `working-directory`: Path to the backend codebase. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `python-version`: Python version to use. Required.
* `plone-version`: Plone version to use. Required.
* `working-directory`: Path to the backend code base. Defaults to `.`.
```

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  test:
    name: "Backend: Coverage"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/backend-pytest-coverage.yml@2.x
    with:
      python-version: 3.12
      plone-version: 6.1.1
      working-directory: backend
```

> ### Documentation Workflows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Documentation workflows

The following sections describe the workflows for documentation.

```

#### `docs-build`

> Builds HTML documentation, checks for broken links, and runs writing style checks using [Vale](https://vale.sh/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `docs-build` builds HTML documentation, checking for MyST syntax errors, and checks for broken links.
It also checks American English spelling, grammar, and syntax, and checks for compliance with the [Microsoft Writing Style Guide](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/welcome/) using [Vale](https://vale.sh/).
```

##### Inputs

* `python-version`: Python version to use. Defaults to `3.12`.

> * `working-directory`: Path to the documentation project. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `working-directory`: Path to the documentation scaffold. Defaults to `.`.
```

* `check-links`: Whether to run broken link checks. Defaults to `true`.
* `check-vale`: Whether to run Vale checks. Defaults to `true`.

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  docs:
    name: "Documentation"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/docs-build.yml@2.x
    with:
      python-version: 3.12
      working-directory: docs
      check-links: true
      check-vale: true
```

> ### Frontend Workflows

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Frontend workflows

The following sections describe the workflows for the Plone frontend.

```

#### `frontend-acceptance`

> Runs frontend acceptance tests using [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/), including server startup and artifact uploads (screenshots, videos).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `frontend-acceptance` runs frontend acceptance tests using [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/), including server startup and artifact uploads with screenshots and videos.
```

##### Inputs

> * `node-version`: Node.js version to use. (Required)
> * `working-directory`: Path to the frontend codebase. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `node-version`: Node.js version to use. Required.
* `working-directory`: Path to the frontend code base. Defaults to `.`.
```

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  acceptance:
    name: "Frontend: Acceptance Tests"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/frontend-acceptance.yml@2.x
    with:
      node-version: 22.x
      working-directory: frontend
```

#### `frontend-code`

> Runs static analysis (linting) on a frontend codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `frontend-code` runs static analysis, or linting, on a frontend code base.
```

##### Inputs

> * `node-version`: Node.js version to use. (Required)
> * `working-directory`: Path to the frontend codebase. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `node-version`: Node.js version to use. Required.
* `working-directory`: Path to the frontend code base. Defaults to `.`.
```

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  qa:
    name: "Frontend: Code Analysis"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/frontend-code.yml@2.x
    with:
      node-version: 22.x
      working-directory: frontend
```

#### `frontend-i18n`

> Validates that frontend translation files are up-to-date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `frontend-i18n` validates that frontend translation files are up to date.
```

##### Inputs

> * `node-version`: Node.js version to use. (Required)
> * `working-directory`: Path to the frontend codebase. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `node-version`: Node.js version to use. Required.
* `working-directory`: Path to the frontend code base. Defaults to `.`.
```

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  i18n:
    name: "Frontend: i18n Checks"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/frontend-i18n.yml@2.x
    with:
      node-version: 22.x
      working-directory: frontend
```

#### `frontend-storybook`

> Builds Storybook documentation and optionally deploys it to GitHub Pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `frontend-storybook` builds Storybook documentation and optionally deploys it to GitHub Pages.
```

##### Inputs

> * `node-version`: Node.js version to use. (Required)
> * `working-directory`: Path to the frontend codebase. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `node-version`: Node.js version to use. Required.
* `working-directory`: Path to the frontend code base. Defaults to `.`.
```

* `deploy`: Whether to deploy the Storybook build. Defaults to `false`.

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  storybook:
    name: "Frontend: Storybook"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/frontend-storybook.yml@2.x
    with:
      node-version: 22.x
      working-directory: frontend
      deploy: true
```

#### `frontend-unit`

> Runs unit tests on a frontend codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `frontend-unit` runs unit tests on a frontend code base.
```

##### Inputs

> * `node-version`: Node.js version to use. (Required)
> * `working-directory`: Path to the frontend codebase. Defaults to `.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `node-version`: Node.js version to use. Required.
* `working-directory`: Path to the frontend code base. Defaults to `.`.
```

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  unit:
    name: "Frontend: Unit Tests"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/frontend-unit.yml@2.x
    with:
      node-version: 22.x
      working-directory: frontend
```

> ### Container Workflows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Container workflows

The following sections describe the workflows for Plone container images.

```

#### `container-image-build-push`

> Builds and optionally pushes a container image for use in tests or deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `container-image-build-push` builds and optionally pushes a container image for use in tests or deployments.
```

##### Inputs

> * `base-tag`: Base tag for the image (e.g., `1.0.0`). (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `base-tag`: Base tag for the image, for example, `1.0.0`. Required.
```

* `working-directory`: Path to the project directory containing the Dockerfile. Defaults to `.`.

> * `image-name-prefix`: Image name prefix (e.g., organization or repository name). (Required)
> * `image-name-suffix`: Image name suffix (e.g., service identifier). (Required)
> * `platforms`: Platforms to build for. Defaults to `linux/amd64`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `image-name-prefix`: Image name prefix, for example, the organization or repository name. Required.
* `image-name-suffix`: Image name suffix, for example, the service identifier. Required.
* `platforms`: Platforms for which to build the image. Defaults to `linux/amd64`.
```

* `dockerfile`: Relative path to the Dockerfile. Defaults to `Dockerfile`.
* `registry`: Container registry URL. Defaults to `ghcr.io`.
* `build-args`: Additional build arguments. Defaults to `""`.

> * `push`: Whether to push the built image. (Required)

Reviewer: Please check that I got this one right.

```suggestion
* `push`: Whether to push the built image. Defaults to `true`.
```

##### Secrets

> * `username`: Registry username. (Required)
> * `password`: Registry password. (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `username`: Registry username. Required.
* `password`: Registry password. Required.
```

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  build-image:
    name: "Container: Build and Push"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/container-image-build-push.yml@2.x
    with:
      base-tag: 1.0.0
      working-directory: frontend
      image-name-prefix: ghcr.io/collective/collective-addon
      image-name-suffix: frontend
      platforms: linux/amd64
      dockerfile: Dockerfile
      registry: ghcr.io
      build-args: |
        VOLTO_VERSION=18.14.1
      push: true
    secrets:
      username: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }}
      password: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }}
```

#### `container-image-build`

> Builds a container image optimized for caching, typically used for internal tests (e.g., acceptance tests).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `container-image-build` builds a container image optimized for caching, typically used for internal tests, for example, acceptance tests.
```

##### Inputs

> * `base-tag`: Base tag for the image. (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `base-tag`: Base tag for the image. Required.
```

* `working-directory`: Path to the project directory containing the Dockerfile. Defaults to `.`.

> * `image-name-prefix`: Image name prefix. (Required)
> * `image-name-suffix`: Image name suffix. (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `image-name-prefix`: Image name prefix. Required.
* `image-name-suffix`: Image name suffix. Required.
```

* `image-cache-suffix`: Suffix for naming cache images. Defaults to `buildcache`.

> * `platforms`: Platforms to build for. Defaults to `linux/amd64`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `platforms`: Platforms for which to build the image. Defaults to `linux/amd64`.
```

* `dockerfile`: Relative path to the Dockerfile. Defaults to `Dockerfile`.
* `registry`: Container registry URL. Defaults to `ghcr.io`.
* `build-args`: Additional build arguments. Defaults to `""`.

> * `cache-key`: Cache identification key. Defaults to the branch name (`github.ref_name`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `cache-key`: Cache identification key. Defaults to the branch name, for example, `github.ref_name`.
```

##### Secrets

> * `username`: Registry username. (Required)
> * `password`: Registry password. (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `username`: Registry username. Required.
* `password`: Registry password. Required.
```

##### Example usage

```yaml
jobs:
  build-image:
    name: "Container: Build Only"
    uses: plone/meta/.github/workflows/container-image-build.yml@2.x
    with:
      base-tag: branch-x
      working-directory: backend
      image-name-prefix: ghcr.io/collective/collective-addon
      image-name-suffix: backend
      image-cache-suffix: buildcache
      platforms: linux/amd64
      dockerfile: Dockerfile
      registry: ghcr.io
      build-args: |
        PLONE_VERSION=6.1.1
      cache-key: branch-x
    secrets:
      username: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }}
      password: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }}
```

#### `container-image-push`

> Builds and pushes a container image to a registry, generating multiple tags based on branch, commit, and semantic versioning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow `container-image-push` builds and pushes a container image to a registry, generating multiple tags based on branch, commit, and semantic versioning.
```

##### Inputs

> * `base-tag`: Base tag for the image. (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `base-tag`: Base tag for the image. Required.
```

* `working-directory`: Path to the project directory containing the Dockerfile. Defaults to `.`.

> * `image-name-prefix`: Image name prefix. (Required)
> * `image-name-suffix`: Image name suffix. (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `image-name-prefix`: Image name prefix. Required.
* `image-name-suffix`: Image name suffix. Required.
```

* `image-cache-suffix`: Suffix for naming cache images. Defaults to `buildcache`.

> * `platforms`: Platforms to build for. Defaults to `linux/amd64`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `platforms`: Platforms for which to build the image. Defaults to `linux/amd64`.
```

* `dockerfile`: Relative path to the Dockerfile. Defaults to `Dockerfile`.
* `registry`: Container registry URL. Defaults to `ghcr.io`.
* `build-args`: Additional build arguments. Defaults to `""`.

> * `cache-key`: Cache identification key. Defaults to the branch name (`github.ref_name`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `cache-key`: Cache identification key. Defaults to the branch name, for example, `github.ref_name`.
```

##### Secrets

> * `username`: Registry username. (Required)
> * `password`: Registry password. (Required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `username`: Registry username. Required.
* `password`: Registry password. Required.
```

There are a few, and growing, other configuration options in a few files,
where the simple approach described above is not enough.

## GitHub Actions shared automations

> To avoid [duplicating](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/sharing-automations/avoiding-duplication) workflow content across Plone projects, the [`plone/meta` repository](https://github.com/plone/meta) provides a set of reusable workflows and composite actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To [avoid duplicating workflow content](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/sharing-automations/avoiding-duplication) across Plone projects, the [`plone/meta` repository](https://github.com/plone/meta) provides a set of reusable workflows and composite actions.
```
